[Music]
the effect of the turning tide can be
totally different on a rocky shore here
on the coast of Vancouver Island in
Canada the Sun bakes the exposed rock
it's virtually impossible to dig
underground when the sea retreats
so these mussels and barnacles are fully
exposed to the heat of the Sun literally
cooking in their own shells and the
seaweed simply dry to a crisp
it can be a weight of many hours before
the water returns throughout each month
the size and strength of the tide
changes the biggest tides have all
happened when the gravities of the Sun
and Moon pull in unison that happens
immediately after the new moon and again
after the full moon
these are called the spring tides they
reveal vast tracts of seabed that would
normally be covered for these raccoons
it's a chance to look for a seafood
feast the mother ventures forth with her
kits with the spring tide they've come
further down the beats and smaller tides
would normally allow
searching with their extraordinarily
sensitive paws they look for suitable
prey with the extreme low tide they
could find something special
and what could be better than a Red Rock
crab that is if it weren't for the risk
of a painful pinch
with large crabs there's no substitute
for experience the mother makes an
expert sketch
but the kids learn fast
and for those that don't begging is
always worth a try all too soon the
returning tide will cover the raccoons
table
for all invertebrates it's a welcome
relief but in rough weather they are
exposed to the worst of the waves
so now for this tulip snail it'll be as
safe to patrol the shallows in search of
a meal but is it this is a rather bigger
kind of snail as five kilograms in
weight the giant horse conch has little
to fear from any shark and it has a
taste for tulips now
sensing the approaching danger the snail
flees but in a world of snail paces the
conch is something of a Ferrari it calls
for desperate measures
exhausted by the effort of its
last-ditch attempt the tulip snail is
slowly gunned down
the tide still has to rise for another
hour before the big predators can feed
but out on the flats the scent of dying
snail wafts away on the tide it's a
scent that these hermit crabs are
particularly partial to it's vital that
the crabs have the best possible
protection from the heavy teeth of the
waiting sharks and rays for that they
need the shell with a perfect fit today
there is new real estate on offer and
competition in this housing market is
fierce
[Music]
the action becomes even more desperate
when the shell of the devoured snail is
ready for release this crab simply can't
wait any longer but it's a decidedly
risky acquisition the risk paid off
handsomely the new shell is both Lysa
and stronger than the old home and it's
not a moment too soon because the tide
is flowing in strongly flooding the
plains
it's now midsummer and the sun is
shining at full strength the increasing
warmth is the cue for an Atlantic
lobster to start on a long journey she
spent the winter 250 meters down far
beyond the reach of the storms but it
was cold down there and now she needs to
find warmer water so she's marching
towards the shallows they however are a
hundred and fifty kilometres away after
a month of walking she finally arrives
at her favorite sand bank but she's not
the first here dozens of other lobsters
have already dug themselves homes in the
sand and they don't intend to surrender
them to newcomers
[Music]
size counts for everything in these
battles the new arrival is in urgent
need of a pit and since she weighs a
hefty seven kilos she stands a good
chance of getting one
[Music]
she's won these battles continue for the
next two months and they're crucial for
the females must have both shelter and
warm water is there to raise their young
for the last seven months each of these
females has been carrying around about
20,000 fertilized eggs but their task is
approaching its end the warmth of the
shallows is speeding the eggs
development two more months and the eggs
are ready to hatch
[Music]
at first they're not very good at
swimming but within a few minutes the
babies are able to set off in a
purposeful way a tiny island lost in the
midst of the Pacific it's the tip of a
huge mountain that rises precipitously
from the seafloor thousands of metres
below
the nearest land is 300 miles away
isolated seamounts like this one create
a a seas where life can flourish in the
comparatively empty expanses of the open
ocean
but all the creatures that swim beside
it would not be here were it not for one
key factor
the deep ocean currents
far below the surface they collide with
the islands flanks and are deflected
upwards bringing with them from the
depths a rich soup of nutrients
such upwellings attract great
concentrations of life
[Music]
most of the fish here are permanent
residents feeding on the plankton are
tiny floating plants and animals that
are nama schnur's brought up from the
depths and they in turn attract visitors
from the open ocean
- now
[Music]
[Applause]
the plankton feeders are easy targets
all this action attracts even larger
predators sharks hundreds of sharks
these silky sharks are normally
ocean-going species but the sea mounts
in the eastern Pacific my Koko small
pillow and the Galapagos attract silk is
in huge groups up to 500 strong
[Music]
silted seemed to specialize in taking
injured fish and constantly circle sea
mounts on the lookout for the chance to
do so
but so Kia's are not the only visitors
hammerheads gather in some of the
largest shark shoals to be found
anywhere in the ocean sometimes
thousands will circle over a single sea
mount
but these sharks are not here for food
they have come for another reason
some of the locals provide a cleaning
service
following the last I'll in your year
when a rise in water temperatures caused
many sharks to suffer from fungal
infections the number of hammerheads
visiting the sea mounts reached record
levels
[Music]
[Applause]
it returns to the place where it last
left its chick in the hope that it might
still be close by but chicks talent one
day so the adult has to call the chick
responds and they slowly homed in on one
another
the plaintiff entreaties of the chip
stimulates the adult to regurgitate a
mouthful of fish
with the return of one parent the other
is free to go to sea to feed for itself
[Music]
aware of the leopard seals presence the
penguins pressed together at the ice
edge unwilling to be the first to risk
diving in
[Music]
occasionally the seal comes out onto the
ice and attempts to grab one
[Applause]
[Music]
but it's most successful strategy by far
is the lion wait
[Music]
it hides behind the corner of ice
the antlers gain confidence and make a
dash for it
[Applause]
the first wave of penguins escape
once in open water there will be safe
the seal is alerted by the noise and
through the massive bubbles it makes its
attack
[Music]
almost invariably it makes a kill
[Applause]
[Music]
encouraged by the absence of the seal
the remaining penguins make a break for
the open sea
[Applause]
[Music]
and time their cheeks will Fletch and
when the Antarctic autumn is nearly ten
these adults will walk across the newly
formed ice to endure yet another winter
on the frozen sea
[Applause]